Notes.md, before:

## Notes on the videos for Module 12 "Infrastructure as Code with Terraform"
<br />

<details>
<summary>Video: 1 - Introduction to Terraform</summary>
<br />

Terraform is an open-source infrastructure as code (IaC) or infrastructure provisioning tool by HashiCorp. It let's you automate and manage:
- your infrastructure
- your platform
- services that run on that platform

You do so by defining the resources in human-readable configuration files which you
can version, reuse and share.

The configuration files are defined in a declarative way, so you define WHAT end result or desired state you want and Terraform will figure out how to do it.

Before you can deploy your applications to an infrastructure like AWS you have to provision this infrastructure. With AWS for example you have to create a private network space, setup EC2 server instances, install Docker and other tools on them, configure security (firewalls etc.) and so on. With Terraform you can automate these steps, manage continuous changes to your infrastructure and easily replicate the same infrastructure on different environments like DEV, STAGE, PROD.

### Difference of Terraform and Ansible
Both are IaC tools, but
- **Terraform** is mainly an infrastructure provisioning tool. It is more advanced in orchestration and better for provisioning the infrastructure. It is relatively new.
- Whereas **Ansible** is mainly a configuration mangenment tool and better for configuring the provisioned infrastructure and deploying applications on it. It is more mature.

### Terraform Architecture
How does Terraform connect to the platform provider? It has two main components:
- the **Core** takes two input sources:
  - TF config-files (.tf), where you define what to create and configure
  - TF state (terraform.tfstate), which contains the current state of the infrastructure setup
  
  The core then compares the current state with the desired state (config files) and figures out what has to be created, updated or destroyed to reach the desired state.
- **Providers** for specific technologies like AWS (IaaS), Azure (IaaS), Kubernetes (PaaS), Fastly (SaaS). Currently there are more than a 100 providers giving access to over 1000 resources.

Once the core has built its plan to transition from the current state to the desired state it uses providers to execute the actual steps.

### Example Configuration Files
```conf
# Configure the AWS Provider
provider "aws" {
  version = "~> 2.0"
  region  = "us-east-1"
}

# Create a VPC
resource "aws_vpc" "example" {
  cidr_block = "10.0.0.0/16"
}
```

```conf
# Configure the Kubernetes Provider
provider "kubernetes" {
  config_context_auth_info = "ops"
  config_context_cluster   = "mycluster"
}

# Create a Namespace
resource "kubernetes_namespace" "example" {
  name = "my-first-namespace"
}
```

### Terraform Commands
- `refresh`: query infrastructure provider to get current state
- `plan`: create an execution plan and review it
- `apply`: actually execute the plan
- `destroy`: destroy the resources/infrastructure

`apply` and `destroy` can be called without first calling `refresh` or `plan`. They will both automatically call these two other commands before doing their own job.

### Links
- [Terraform](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform)

</details>

*****

<details>
<summary>Video: 2 - Install Terraform & Setup Terraform Project</summary>
<br />

Open the [Terraform Download Page](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/downloads) to get instructions on how to install Terraform on the various operating systems.

On a Mac the easiest way to install and update Terraform is using the package manager homebrew:
```sh
# install
brew tap hashicorp/tap
brew install hashicorp/tap/terraform

# check installation
terraform -v
# Terraform v1.4.6
# on darwin_arm64

# update
brew update
brew upgrade hashicorp/tap/terraform
```

### Local Setup
The examples use AWS as the target platform. But the commands would be similar on other platforms.

First we create a folder where we are going to execute our demo commands:
```sh
mkdir terraform
cd terraform

touch main.tf
```

If you want to edit the files in VS Code you can install a plugin (e.g. the official one by Hashicorp or the one by Anton Kulikov) to get syntax highlighting and auto-completion.

</details>

*****

<details>
<summary>Video: 3 - Providers in Terraform</summary>
<br />

### Providers
A Terraform-Provider is a plugin Terraform uses to manage the resources. It exposes the resources for a specific infrastructure platform (e.g. AWS) and is responsible for understanding the API of that platform. So it is just code that knows how to talk to a specific technology or platform.

On the [Terraform Registry Page](https://registry.terraform.io/browse/providers) you find a list of all the currently available providers. Click on AWS > Documentation to get instructions on how to use this provider. Documentation is available for all the providers which makes it very convenient to work with and use Terraform.

### Install and Connect to Provider
To install a provider we first need to have a .tf file declaring that provider. So open the `terraform/main.tf` file and add the following content:
```conf
provider "aws" {
    region = "eu-central-1"
    access-key = "your-aws-access-key-id"
    secret-key = "your-aws-secret-access-key"
}
```

Note that Terraform configuration files are meant to be checked in as part of the project's source code to the Git repository. Therefore you should never write credentials into these files. In the case of access-key and secret-key you could omit them and set according environment variables `AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID` and `AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY` instead. But we will see other possibilities to reference credentials soon.

Now that we have declared a provider in the configuration file we can install it by executing the following command (note that we have to be in the same directory as the configuration file when executing the command):
```sh
terraform init
# Initializing the backend...

# Initializing provider plugins...
# - Finding latest version of hashicorp/aws...
# - Installing hashicorp/aws v4.67.0...
# - Installed hashicorp/aws v4.67.0 (signed by HashiCorp)

# Terraform has created a lock file .terraform.lock.hcl to record the provider
# selections it made above. Include this file in your version control repository
# so that Terraform can guarantee to make the same selections by default when
# you run "terraform init" in the future.

# Terraform has been successfully initialized!
```

It is recommended (and for non-offical providers - with a source other than hashicorp - even mandatory) to explicitly declare all the providers used in the project in a `required_providers` block like this:
```conf
terraform {
  required_providers {
    aws = {
      source = "hashicorp/aws"
      version = "4.67.0"
    }

    linode = {
      source = "linode/linode"
      version = "2.2.0"
    }
  }
}
```
You find that block on the provider page by pressing the "USE PROVIDER" button at the top right. You may add this block to the main configuration file or even put it in a separate file, e.g. `providers.tf`.

### Providers Exposing Resources
Providers provide access to the complete API of the related platform. You find a list of all available resources on the documentation page of the provider (on the left).

</details>

*****

Commit message:

Add note on git ignore for the provider

Notes.md, after:

## Notes on the videos for Module 12 "Infrastructure as Code with Terraform"
<br />

<details>
<summary>Video: 1 - Introduction to Terraform</summary>
<br />

Terraform is an open-source infrastructure as code (IaC) or infrastructure provisioning tool by HashiCorp. It let's you automate and manage:
- your infrastructure
- your platform
- services that run on that platform

You do so by defining the resources in human-readable configuration files which you
can version, reuse and share.

The configuration files are defined in a declarative way, so you define WHAT end result or desired state you want and Terraform will figure out how to do it.

Before you can deploy your applications to an infrastructure like AWS you have to provision this infrastructure. With AWS for example you have to create a private network space, setup EC2 server instances, install Docker and other tools on them, configure security (firewalls etc.) and so on. With Terraform you can automate these steps, manage continuous changes to your infrastructure and easily replicate the same infrastructure on different environments like DEV, STAGE, PROD.

### Difference of Terraform and Ansible
Both are IaC tools, but
- **Terraform** is mainly an infrastructure provisioning tool. It is more advanced in orchestration and better for provisioning the infrastructure. It is relatively new.
- Whereas **Ansible** is mainly a configuration mangenment tool and better for configuring the provisioned infrastructure and deploying applications on it. It is more mature.

### Terraform Architecture
How does Terraform connect to the platform provider? It has two main components:
- the **Core** takes two input sources:
  - TF config-files (.tf), where you define what to create and configure
  - TF state (terraform.tfstate), which contains the current state of the infrastructure setup
  
  The core then compares the current state with the desired state (config files) and figures out what has to be created, updated or destroyed to reach the desired state.
- **Providers** for specific technologies like AWS (IaaS), Azure (IaaS), Kubernetes (PaaS), Fastly (SaaS). Currently there are more than a 100 providers giving access to over 1000 resources.

Once the core has built its plan to transition from the current state to the desired state it uses providers to execute the actual steps.

### Example Configuration Files
```conf
# Configure the AWS Provider
provider "aws" {
  version = "~> 2.0"
  region  = "us-east-1"
}

# Create a VPC
resource "aws_vpc" "example" {
  cidr_block = "10.0.0.0/16"
}
```

```conf
# Configure the Kubernetes Provider
provider "kubernetes" {
  config_context_auth_info = "ops"
  config_context_cluster   = "mycluster"
}

# Create a Namespace
resource "kubernetes_namespace" "example" {
  name = "my-first-namespace"
}
```

### Terraform Commands
- `refresh`: query infrastructure provider to get current state
- `plan`: create an execution plan and review it
- `apply`: actually execute the plan
- `destroy`: destroy the resources/infrastructure

`apply` and `destroy` can be called without first calling `refresh` or `plan`. They will both automatically call these two other commands before doing their own job.

### Links
- [Terraform](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform)

</details>

*****

<details>
<summary>Video: 2 - Install Terraform & Setup Terraform Project</summary>
<br />

Open the [Terraform Download Page](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/downloads) to get instructions on how to install Terraform on the various operating systems.

On a Mac the easiest way to install and update Terraform is using the package manager homebrew:
```sh
# install
brew tap hashicorp/tap
brew install hashicorp/tap/terraform

# check installation
terraform -v
# Terraform v1.4.6
# on darwin_arm64

# update
brew update
brew upgrade hashicorp/tap/terraform
```

### Local Setup
The examples use AWS as the target platform. But the commands would be similar on other platforms.

First we create a folder where we are going to execute our demo commands:
```sh
mkdir terraform
cd terraform

touch main.tf
```

If you want to edit the files in VS Code you can install a plugin (e.g. the official one by Hashicorp or the one by Anton Kulikov) to get syntax highlighting and auto-completion.

</details>

*****

<details>
<summary>Video: 3 - Providers in Terraform</summary>
<br />

### Providers
A Terraform-Provider is a plugin Terraform uses to manage the resources. It exposes the resources for a specific infrastructure platform (e.g. AWS) and is responsible for understanding the API of that platform. So it is just code that knows how to talk to a specific technology or platform.

On the [Terraform Registry Page](https://registry.terraform.io/browse/providers) you find a list of all the currently available providers. Click on AWS > Documentation to get instructions on how to use this provider. Documentation is available for all the providers which makes it very convenient to work with and use Terraform.

### Install and Connect to Provider
To install a provider we first need to have a .tf file declaring that provider. So open the `terraform/main.tf` file and add the following content:
```conf
provider "aws" {
    region = "eu-central-1"
    access-key = "your-aws-access-key-id"
    secret-key = "your-aws-secret-access-key"
}
```

Note that Terraform configuration files are meant to be checked in as part of the project's source code to the Git repository. Therefore you should never write credentials into these files. In the case of access-key and secret-key you could omit them and set according environment variables `AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID` and `AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY` instead. But we will see other possibilities to reference credentials soon.

Now that we have declared a provider in the configuration file we can install it by executing the following command (note that we have to be in the same directory as the configuration file when executing the command):
```sh
terraform init
# Initializing the backend...

# Initializing provider plugins...
# - Finding latest version of hashicorp/aws...
# - Installing hashicorp/aws v4.67.0...
# - Installed hashicorp/aws v4.67.0 (signed by HashiCorp)

# Terraform has created a lock file .terraform.lock.hcl to record the provider
# selections it made above. Include this file in your version control repository
# so that Terraform can guarantee to make the same selections by default when
# you run "terraform init" in the future.

# Terraform has been successfully initialized!
```

This command downloaded the provider and put it into a local `.terraform/providers/` folder. You should gitignore the `.terraform` folder. The file `.terraform.lock.hcl` however, which was also created and keeps track of the installed providers, should be checked in to Git repository.

It is recommended (and for non-offical providers - with a source other than hashicorp - even mandatory) to explicitly declare all the providers used in the project in a `required_providers` block like this:
```conf
terraform {
  required_providers {
    aws = {
      source = "hashicorp/aws"
      version = "4.67.0"
    }

    linode = {
      source = "linode/linode"
      version = "2.2.0"
    }
  }
}
```
You find that block on the provider page by pressing the "USE PROVIDER" button at the top right. You may add this block to the main configuration file or even put it in a separate file, e.g. `providers.tf`.

### Providers Exposing Resources
Providers provide access to the complete API of the related platform. You find a list of all available resources on the documentation page of the provider (on the left).

</details>

*****
